# Notes 

## Actions

To do list for 2022 application (see Key below)

:::{admonition} Page structure
:class: warning, dropdown
  As discussed with Rebecca, this should be approximately ... 
  - Science (5 Pages):
   - Page 1: Background Science (1 Figure)
   - Page 2: Congested Subduction (Louis/ Dan / Andres / Rebecca)
   - Page 3: Coupled Surface / Subduction models (Neng / Romain / Louis / Rebecca)
   - Page 4: Groundwater Models (Ben/Louis/Adam)
   - Page 5: Plate Boundary Dynamics (Haibin/Dan/Louis/Romain)

  - Computing (10 Pages):
   - Page 1-2: Algorithm, Methods, parallelism across all projects (LM)
   - Scaling results (2 Pages - Julian / Romain)
   - Time requests and justification and workflow (remainder
   
  - References (Any number of pages ... apparently)
   )
:::

:::{admonition} 3rd person anonymous
:class: warning, dropdown
  In theory, "we" is appropriate for a discussion between a reader and an author (mathematical derivations always seem better written that way) but the 2021 text doesn't feel quite right.
:::

:::{admonition} Timing results
:class: warning, dropdown
  In theory, "we" is appropriate for a discussion between a reader and an author (mathematical derivations always seem better written that way) but the 2021 text doesn't feel quite right.
:::

:::{admonition} Update CVs / Publications etc (CIs only)
:class: warning, dropdown
  Need to be completed on the NCI system
  - LM 
  - RF
  - RB
  - BM
:::

:::{admonition} Early Earth - remove 
:class: error, dropdown
  Not room for this in the proposal this time around and we can squeeze this in to m18 if Adam needs a few hours
:::

:::{admonition} Craton destruction 
:class: error, dropdown
  Action - Rebecca to review
:::

:::{admonition} Andres / subduction
:class: error, dropdown
  Need to include & integrate material from Andres. Note that there is lots of space in the 10 pages about computation for details but not to introduce the science. 
:::

:::{admonition} Haibin / Fault rupture models
:class: error, dropdown
  Need to include & integrate material from Haibin. Note that there is lots of space in the 10 pages about computation for details but not to introduce the science. 
:::

:::{admonition} Instructions to applicants (X - 2021.09.26)
:class: note, dropdown
  Add links / notes to the section below. 
:::

:::{admonition} Figure numbering / single page versions
:class: note, dropdown
  The `use_multitoc_numbering: false` directive is supposed to 
  suppress book-like figure numbers. This does not seem to do 
  what I would expect so figure numbers bleed from the intro page 
  and across years. That is what the single-page builds are for 
  and these are linked into the index so we can find them. It's very
  ugly but so are any other solutions I came up with. It'll get fixed 
  by the JB team eventually.
:::

## Instructions from NCI

 - [Instructions (PDF)](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini-assets/media/mas/ncmas/2022/NCMAS2022-NCMAS-2022-Info4Applicants_210910_FIN-20210910T120842AEST.pdf)

### Scoring scheme:

NCMAS applications will be scored on the following criteria:

- Project quality and innovation (40%)
  - Significance of the research
  - Originality and innovative nature of the computational framework
  - Advancement of knowledge through the goals of the proposed research
  - Potential for the research to contribute to Australian science, research and innovation priorities

- Investigator records (30%)
  - Research record and performance relative to opportunity (publications, research funding, recognition and esteem metrics)

- Computational feasibility (20%)
  - Adequacy of the time commitment of investigators to undertake the research and utilise the resources successfully
  - Suitability of the nominated system(s) to support the research, and the appropriate and efficient use of the system(s)
  - Capacity to realise the goals of the project within the resources request
  - Appropriate track record in the use of high-performance computing systems, relative to the scale of the resources requested

- Benefit and impact (10%)

  - Ability of the project to generate impactful outcomes and produce innovative economic, environmental and social benefits to Australia and the international community

### Proposal Format (Science Case)

The Proposal is the part of your application that describes the research to be supported, and should focus on the assessment criteria of Project quality and innovation and Benefit and Impact.

- Provide sufficient background to clearly define the goals of the project.
- Emphasise the significance, impact and innovation of the research.
- Describe the significance and impact in the scientific domain.
- Describe the significance and impact on society and industry partners (if applicable).
- Be specific and concise.
  -  Avoid broad general statements,such as "This research is significant to Australia".

Proposal Length

- Proposal should be *no longer than five (5) pages (excluding references)*. Providing historical *context and ten-year scope of the research should take no more than one (1) page*.

### Proposal Format (Computational Case)

In the Computational Details part of your application you should focus on the assessment criteria of Computational Feasibility and provide details on:

- Scalability on each nominated facility:
  - Use scalability tables and/or plots
  - For software with multi-node capability, applicants should present data relative to single node performance, not single core performance.
  - Poor scaling may impact negatively on the merit of the application.

- Compute job resources at each nominated facility:
  - Provide details on typical job configurations for your workflows,including
   - expected wall times
   - number of nodes/cores
   - data dependencies
   - expected throughput, and so on.

 - Provide a summary of the resource requirements in the form of an “SU budget” for each request. This budget should list:
   - major steps in the project workflow(s) 
   - the key methods/algorithms required 
   - and the SU requirements for each step
      - Also describe other dependencies such as software and storage.

- Storage at each nominated facility:
  - Describe data storage requirements and data life cycle for your project.
- Algorithms and Workflows:
  - Describe parallelism in your application(s) and how this relates to mathematical algorithms used. 
  - Describe data movement and lifecycle.

- Provide a clear justification for use of supercomputer resources:
  - This justification might elaborate on,for example, a requirement for large scale parallel jobs, high throughput workflows, or data-intensive workflows using large data sets.

- If previous resource usage at a facility has had low efficiencies, explain why, and describe your strategies to improve efficiency:
 - One example of inefficiency is an application with a large memory per core
requirement. This can lead to underuse of reserved cpus.

Computational Details should be no longer than ten (10) pages (excluding references).

## Key

Action item
  : `warning` class 

Resolved item
  : `note` class 
  
Urgent
  : `attention` class 



::::{dropdown}

:::{admonition}  note
:class: note
note
:::  

:::{admonition} attention
:class: attention
attention
:::   

:::{admonition}  caution
:class: caution
caution
:::   

:::{admonition}  warning
:class: warning
warning
:::   

:::{admonition}  danger
:class: danger
danger
:::   

:::{admonition}  error
:class: error
error
:::   

:::{admonition} hint
:class: hint
hint
:::   

:::{admonition}  tip
:class: tip
tip
:::   

:::{admonition} important
:class: important
important
:::   

::::

