# Research Proposal: m18 / NCMAS

__Evolution and dynamics of the Australian lithosphere__


````{sidebar} The India-Eurasia Collision Zone
```{figure} Figures/HimalayaS.png
---
width: 100%
name: "Himalayas2022"
class: sidebar
---
One of the most dramatic departures from plate-like deformation on Earth occurs where the Indian subcontinent collides with the Eurasian continent. Flow lines from the plate motion vector field drawn in red (Left) and major rivers which drain the Himalayan plateau. On the right is the same region showing 50 years of Earthquake data for events larger than magnitude 4.5, coloured by depth and superimposed on the strain rate. (Figure: {cite}`moresiComputationalPlateTectonics2015`)
```

**Motivating Questions**

- What is the history, state and ultimate fate of the (Indo-) Australian plate ?
- How are continents built, how do they survive, and when is continental crust destroyed ?
- How are deep mantle processes captured in the geological / sedimentary record ?
- How does lithospheric stress and basin structure influence groundwater flow ?
- How do we include fault evolution (with its short timescale) into long-term tectonics models ?

````

````{div} full-width

The dynamic principles underlying plate tectonics are a fundamental aspect of the geological canon for which there is very little quantitative / predictive modelling and many outstanding questions. Plates, plate boundary geometries, plate motions and continental deformation patterns are emergent phenomena resulting from the large-scale mantle flow and strongly non-linear response of the cold, strong lithosphere to mantle stresses. The oceanic plates are, in fact, the cold boundary layer of the global mantle circulation and are entirely recycled into the interior within 200Myr. The continental crust, which is compositionally more buoyant, is deformed but not destroyed by plate processes. As a result, our knowledge of plate-processes in deep geological time depends on our ability to reconstruct the secondary effects of long-dead plates on the continental geological record usually through modelling.

With this in mind, geodynamics, as a discipline, is founded upon numerical modeling to understand the nature of emergent processes given reliable models at the smaller scales, and to open the possibility of simulation at the plate scale through a formal process of data assimilation.  _Computational geodynamic modelling now plays a central role in emerging conceptual frameworks for the geological and geophysics disciplines. Examples are the way in which subduction, accretion and rollback events have built and deformed the continental lithosphere, and how mountain buildign, seismicity, and plate-driving forces are being reinterpreted in the context of high-resolution dynamic models._


The geodynamics community has developed a number of widely-used, open-source software platforms which are designed specifically to address our very particular requirements. This project is built upon the community-developed `Underworld` software framework which is optimised for parallel HPC (see computational requirements section) and all of the modelling innovations will be released through the `Underworld` model library () and the `Underworld` repository ().

This project develops and extends computational geodynamic modelling at the scale of the lithospheric plates that incorporate mantle flow, plate margin evolution and continental deformation. These models are coupled to landscape evolution, geothermal and groundwater flow models in a step towards an integrated simulation capability for the Australian continent. These models will advance fundamental knowledge of large-scale tectonics, mantle evolution and landscape dynamics. They inform mineral exploration targetting in accretionary terranes, groundwater management of nationally significant aquifers, and tectonic hazard modelling.

There are a number of themes that contribute to the big picture of m18, all of which are built upon a common set of numerical tools and workflows.



````

### 1: Congested Subduction and Continental Accretion


Accretion is a process which has almost certainly been occurring for billions of years (as long as plate tectonics has been active). The better understanding of accretion and how it might have occurred in the early Earth has immediate applications to interpreting the geology of ancient terranes that make up 2/3 of the Australian continent.

The Earth’s continental topography is ephemeral - it reflects the balance of deep convective processes, density variations and elastic stresses in the lithosphere. Changes in convective stresses, erosion of high topography (and deposition of sediments in regions of low topography), relaxation of elastic stresses all contribute to erase the history of surface deformation.

To piece together this history, we propose a modelling approach in which we develop a quantitative, dynamic understanding of the subduction-collision-accretion-subduction cycle using state-of-the-art numerical simulations (Underworld) constrained by geological and geophysical observations. Models that people have developed using Underworld are able to capture the full three-dimensional dynamics of a subducting plate, the mantle flow, deformation of the over-riding plate and accreted terrane, and reconfiguration of the plate boundary — all in a self-consistent manner. Since these models produce a 3D stress field and an associated surface uplift, it is also possible to combine these models with state of the art surface evolutions models (for example Badlands and Quagmire) to connect to the sedimentary record.  

#### Significance / Innovation

This study addresses a fundamental question in the dynamics of the mantle and continental lithosphere and how this differs from the plate tectonics paradigm.  The onset of plate tectonics is a key unknown — was it ubiquitous since the early Archean or does the Proterozoic represent the changes associated with the first plate motions ? This question continues to be debated despite being a first order unknown in Earth evolution.
Accretion of island arcs and continental fragments represents one of the fundamental mechanisms of continental growth, with numerous examples dating back to Archean time. Most of Alaska and much of western North America consists of accreted terranes. The geological history of Australia can only be understood by analysing the accretionary events which have built the continent. Geologists currently lack a unifying conceptual framework for the process of accretion: this project aims to provide this framework.
Another conundrum of modern plate tectonics is the manner in which subduction zones initiate. It is known that oceanic transform faults, under appropriate loading conditions, can initiate subduction (e.g. Hall et al, 2003), but the initiation at a passive margin has not been properly explained dynamically. The computational models that we propose to use are specifically capable of addressing this issue.
A significant application of our research is in constraining the possible locations of trenches, and hence mantle buoyancy distribution, by plate reconstruction.
Because trenches can be highly oblique to the plate motion direction, their location and orientation is weakly constrained in reconstructions. Slab windows produce the most dramatic transients in trench motion and reconfiguration. Computational models that are able to model the boundary evolution and the thermo-mechanics of lithosphere as it is subducted can show when slab windows form and how the dynamics of the models change as a result.



In this project the computational backbone is provided by highly parallel solution methods, efficient solvers and particle-based techniques to achieve levels of resolution and rheological fidelity which are a step above the standard Finite Element Methods that use only mesh-based representations. The Underworld developers have concentrated on improving the fidelity of models available to the community and demonstrated that a general code is able to reproduce state-of-the-art studies for specific processes (such as the subduction zone interface - Garel et al, 2014) into general models that can be reused. For example, see the figure below (supplied by the Underworld development team).

Our proposed approach concentrates on understanding the dynamic evolution of plate boundaries in four dimensions with very careful attention to the details of the rheology and numerical approximations at the sub-grid scale. We are therefore confident that the characteristic patterns that have been reported in numerical models do have meaningful analogues in the geological record.

In this project we propose to combine expertise in algorithm development, parallel computing and computational physics alongside domain expertise. We do this in collaboration with the Underworld development team and using the open-source Underworld software. Any novel computational developments that emerge from this project will, after publication, be made available to the community by contributing them to the Underworld community github site where new code can be submitted for review. Developments in the surface process modelling domain can be contributed to the Quagmire team in the same manner.


````{sidebar} Landscape Models (Algorithms ??)
```{figure} Figures/AusFlowDecomp.png
---
width: 100%
name: "Quagmire2022"
---
Numerical flow simulation using Quagmire on 40 processors for the Australian land surface. Topography is based on the ETOPO1 elevation (above geoid) global model at approximately 1km square resolution (7million points).
This simulation uses an arbitrary spatial decomposition computed by parmetis.  All landscape pre-processing and flow computations are computed using parallel matrix computations through PETSc.
```
````

### Impact & Outcomes

The ultimate outcome of this work is that we are starting to reinterpret the large-scale movements and contorted regional architecture in the context of transient accretion followed by a return to stable subduction retreat. Unlike previous reconstructions based on interpreted plate boundary kinematics, simple 2D tectonic sections and rigid plate reconstructions, our reconstruction will consider the terminations of micro-continents, slab geometry, and the role of mantle flow in 3D. We focus on the geological record immediately following a major accretionary event because this is the period of significant plate reconfiguration and modification leading to a new stable convergent margin.

We are beginning to see that the overall tectonic system in such situations has a simple explanation - with morphological complexities in the crustal architecture occurring in a predictable manner during transient episodes of plate margin disequilibrium. The implication of this research is that subduction zones are persistent and may reconfigure and re-form in preference to jumping backward. Unlike many representation of accretionary margins characterised by multiple subduction events with different polarities (e.g. {cite}`fosterEvolutionStructureLachlan2000`), many of the relationships evident in complex accretionary orogenic belts (e.g. Oroclines) may be explained by a single subduction characterised by transient instabilities. This represents a paradigm shift in interpretation of long-lived accretionary orogenic systems including the Tasmanides, but equally, the Altaids in central Asia.

In recent years numerical model outcomes have been  calibrated against a modern example of an accretionary orogenic system (e.g. Moresi 2014). Mantle flow, slab windowing, strike slip deformation, and development of oroclinal crustal geometries are major geodynamic process allowing convergent margins to transition from one stable configuration to another. All of these features are present in the Yakutat. We can study the collision, and plateau subduction process in a Cartesian geometry at first, and then move to geographically constrained models based on the reconstructed plate geometry. The Yakutat terrane is the remnant of an oceanic plateau. It is interpreted to have been accreted onto the margin of north America since the Pliocene, which coincides with a decrease in arc-related magma production in the Wrangall Mountains, making it one of the most juvenile accretionary terranes on the planet.

````{sidebar} Congested Subduction
```{figure} Figures/CongestedSubductionFig.png
---
width: 100%
name: "Yakutat2022"
---
Top/Left: Numerical model of plateau and plume residue collision with a subduction zone indicating flat slab subduction associated with the initial collision (top) and trench advance. slab windowing associated with a later collision. Subduction reinitiates behind the plateau at 100 Myr in this simulation [From {cite}`bettsGeodynamicsOceanicPlateau2015`}]. Top/middle: Map of existing temporary broadband seismic stations (red triangles) and USArray-TA sites (yellow triangles) where instruments were deployed in 2014 as part of NSF's EarthScope program. The subducting plate boundary shown as a green line, collision front in orange and the surface expression of the Yakutat terrane is highlighted in blue. Lateral escape occurs ahead of the collision. Top/right: moho map (depth, km) from {cite}`millerMappingAlaskanMoho2018` showing the strong anomaly associated with the subducting Yakutat terrane. In the lower panels, we note the same processes appear to be happening during the collapse of the Gondwana margin ~90 million years ago. This has important consequences for interpreting the current geology and tectonics of New Zealand.
```
````

The Yakutat lies adjacent to a large slab window, which is interpreted to have opened during the Miocene {cite}`thorkelsonMantleFlowNorthern2011`. The region is also characterised by large horizontal strike-slip translations, accommodated along major plate margin parallel transpressional fault systems, as well as extremely rapid uplift and mountain building associated with the St Elias Orogen {cite}`christesonYakutatTerraneDramatic2010`} where the plateau is actively subducting. The Yakutat terrane has been subject to intense geophysical study. High resolution plate velocity data derived from GPS data, seismic data that constrains the geometry and composition of the Yakutat terrane and the extent of subduction {cite}`worthingtonCrustalStructureYakutat2012`.

The USArray -Transportable Array (Fig above, yellow) is currently being deployed across Alaska complementing the temporary broadband sites (Figure, above, red) which are currently under analysis and have already imaged three-dimensional variation in interface structure that is related to the previously mentioned terrane assemblages, extinct arcs, and contrasts between the subducting oceanic lithosphere, Yakutat terrane, and the overriding continental lithosphere ({cite}`wardLithosphericStructureAlaskan2018`). We will use existing seismic observations to constrain the Moho, lithosphere asthenosphere boundary and slab geometries (e.g. {cite}`worthingtonCrustalStructureYakutat2012, wardLithosphericStructureAlaskan2018`).  This information will be combined with GPS velocities and strain rates, and geological observations to develop refined models of modern day examples. We will incorporate new findings from future USArray data in Alaska to refine the nature/extent of entrainment of the accreted crust during collision, and map mantle flow patterns.


---





We maintain  a culture of robust negotiation for these resources which would be moderately milder with a larger allocation.

### Subduction Zone Simulation

This builds upon recent work on slab dynamics and stress distribution / seismicity ({cite}`sandifordImprovingSubductionInterface2019, sandifordGeometricControlsFlat2019,carluccioImpactVeryWeak2019`) that was published recently and for which all model files are openly available. These have an expected requirement of 500-750 kSU / quarter in line with recent usage. The work in the coming year is to look at 3D effects on topography and deformation in the over-riding plate which will require a further 500-750 kSU/quarter.


````{sidebar} Subduction zone simulation
```{figure} Figures/dan_subduction_figures/pac_model.png
---
width: 100%
name: "Subduction2022"
---
High resolution Underworld2 models demonstrate how slab deformation is expressed in the complex intermediate-depth seimsicity distribution. (a) (b): evolution of model from subduction initation to slab-transition zone interaction; (\c) slab deformation field shown relative to the down-dip direction, showing bending-unbending through the hinge (d) moment tensors from gCMT catalog demonstrating analagous bending-unbending in the Pacfic slab beneath Honshu. (From   {cite}`sandifordGeometricControlsFlat2019` {cite}`sandifordFingerprintsFlexureSlabSeismicity`).
````


### Continental Deformation / Congested Subduction

Large-scale models have been used to understand how mantle flow and plate motions produce identifiable signatures in the continental geological record {cite}`yangContrastedEastAsia2019`. We propose to extend this work with high resolution studies of Alaska and New Zealand in order to understand the response of the continental lithosphere to boundary forces and looking at three dimensional deformation patterns with localisation requiring very high resolution. Together we estimate 150-250kSU/q for this component of the work plan.

### Destroying Craton

{cite}`cooperStructuralEvolutionDeep2017` concluded that destruction of cratonic lithosphere can be directed and magnified by both the cratonic shape and adjacent subduction using 3D instantaneous numerical regional scale models. We proposed here to understand the time dependent nature of the interaction between the stable, long-lined cratonic lithosphere and transient, highly deforming active subduction zones.

### Early Earth and Planets

{cite}`beallFormationCratonicLithosphere2018` demonstrated onset of plate tectonics may be responsible for forming the “indestructible” cratonic nuclei which have persisted in the Earth for billions of years with very little deformation. We will continue this work in a broader application to other solid bodies in the solar system and to take the work into a cylindrical geometry and 3D. We estimate 100-150kSU/q is needed to continue this exploration of parameter space and development of scaling theories.

### Coupling of Surface Processes and Tectonics / Data integration.

State of the art thermo-mechanical models have become very efficient at testing scenarios of tectonic evolution but uncertainties on the rheologies and the complexity of the underlying physics have so far limited the potential to quantitatively predict uplift and subsidence. Underworld Thermo-mechanical models and Quagmire surface processes models can be fully coupled and have thus  the potential to help us resolve the complex interactions between tectonic and erosion in a wide range of tectonic settings. The models also require careful validation and better integration of field data to prevent error in interpretation. Low temperature thermochronology has been extensively used to quantitatively constrain the thermal histories of rocks. It can provide important information on tectonic uplift (or subsidence) by measuring the erosional (or burial) response and can also map the spatial and temporal pattern of geomorphic response of a landscape. We use the temperature evolution of our coupled thermo-mechanical models with surface processes to predict Apatite fission track data (Ages and Track lengths distributions). The aim is to provide a direct means of comparison with actual empirical thermochronometric data which will allow different model scenarios and/or model parameter choices to be robustly tested.




## Computational Details

### Algorithms

````{sidebar} Dynamic models of subduction and plate boundaries

```{figure} Figures/SlabSubduction.png
---
width: 100%
name: "Subduction2022"
---
Left: Underworld reproduction of ultra-high resolution subduction models (Garel et al 2014) that now form a part of the model component library for studying the influence of dynamic processes on continental deformation (From   {cite}`sandifordGeometricControlsFlat2019` ). Right: Models applied to flat slab subduction that predict the stress distribution and regions of seismicity as the slab subducts.
```

````

This project makes extensive use of the `Underworld` suite of software applications which include `UWgeodynamics` for plate-scale problems, `Underwater` for groundwater flow models, and `Quagmire` for landscape evolution models.



### Underworld suite development:

The Underworld and Quagmire codes are a community effort that benefits from all contributions made to the codebase by collaborating teams. In this project, we undertake to contribute all developments to the Underworld open-source projects. In particular, there is an attempt to refresh the solver architecture of Underworld which is of benefit to the community and we intend to participate in this effort. We are requesting 200kSU/q (split between Raijin and Magnus) to support this community exercise.


## References

```{bibliography}
:filter: docname in docnames
```
